1 
 
 
             
 
 
POLICIES - HUMAN RESOURCE POLICY 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Financial Management Service Foundation 
ACCOUNTABILITY HOUSE 
A-5, Sector 26, NOIDA 201 301 
Ph: 91-120-4773200 
Fax: 91-120-4773299 
Email: fmsf@fmsfindia.org 
 

2 
 
OUTLINE OF GOVERNANCE TOOL BOX 
Vol. I: Tools for identifying, recruiting and developing a Board 
Issue 1:Characteristics of Board Member - Click here to download 
Issue 2: What materials to be shared with the Board Members - Click here to download 
Issue 3: Board Members commitment sheet (to be reviewed every year)- Click here to download 
Issue 4:Areas to be covered in Board Orientation process - Click here to download  
Issue 5: Board Diversity Matrix - Click here to download  
Issue 6: Board Size - Click here to download 
Issue 7: Source for Potential Board Members & Creating a support database - Click here to download 
Vol. II: Job description (Including do’s and don’ts) 
Issue 1: Chairperson (Including do’s and don’ts ) - Click here to download 
Issue 2: Vice-Chairperson- Click here to download 
Issue 3: Board Members- - Click here to download 
Issue 4: Secretary - Click here to download 
Issue 5: Treasurer - Click here to download 
Vol. III: Board Evaluations 
Issue 1: Board Evaluation Form - Click here to download 
Issue 2: CEO performance appraisal form - Click here to download 
Vol. IV: Board Committees 
Issue 1: Executive Committees - Click here to download 
3 
 
Issue 2: Audit Committee - Click here to download 
Issue 3: Finance Committee - Click here to download 
Issue 4: Human Resource Committee - Click here to download 
Issue 5: Program Committee - Click here to download 
Vol. V: Policies 
Issue 1: Human Resource Policy 
Issue 2: Finance Policy 
Issue 3: Conflict of Interest Policy 
Issue 4: Gender Policy 
Vol. VI: Conducting Meetings/Making Decisions       
Issue 1: Notice  
Issue 2: Setting the Agenda 
Issue 3: Writing Minutes 
Issue 4: Taking Resolutions 
Issue 5: Attendance 
Issue 6: Following up on Decision 
Issue 7: Evaluating a Board Member 
Vol. VII: Creating a Board Manual 
4 
 
Issue 1: Need for the Board Manual 
Issue 2: Organization Essentials 
Issue 3: Board Structure and Processes 
Issue 4: Board – ED Relations 
Issue 5: Executive Parameters 
Issue 6: Review of Board Manual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE POLICY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Policies are clear, simple statements of how an orga nization intends to conduct its working be it services, 
actions or business. It guides the standard operating protocol of an organization.  
 
The human resource policy is one such document that  broadly contains details on employing staff, 
managing employee performance, dealing with em ployee concerns and supporting staff in the 
organization. It is a formal guide of principles or ru les in the organization that employees are expected to 
adhere to. It aims to describe organization’s prac tices, such as employment, compensation, benefits, 
leaves, hiring and termination procedures, and other pertinent information.   
 
CONTENTS  
INTRODUCTION 5 
OBJECTIVES OF HUMAN RESOURCE POLICY                                                 6 
STEPS INVOLVED IN HUMAN RESOURCE POLICY DEVELOPMENT 7 
RESPONSIBILITY OF DEVELOPING HUMAN RESOURCE POLICY 7 
UPDATING THE HUMAN RESOURCE POLICY 9 
CONCLUSION 9 
6 
 
The human resource policy is essential for communi cating an organization's workplace policy and 
therefore it must be detailed, accurate and approve d by the appropriate authority. The policy manual 
should also be accessible to all staff members and be accompanied by procedures on how the policy will 
be implemented. Generally, procedures describe how a policy will be put to action in an organization. 
Broadly, each procedure should outline the following: 
 Who will do what; 
 What steps they need to take; 
 Which forms of documents are to be used. 
 
Policies and their accompanying procedures will vary between organizations because they reflect the 
values, approaches and commitment of a specific organization and its culture. 
 
 
2. OBJECTIVES OF HUMAN RESOURCE POLICY  
Human Resource policy helps the organization to establis h robust structure and basic set rules that is used 
to manage the employees on a day to day basis. It en courages fair and consistent treatment of employees. 
The board objectives of the human resource policy are: 
2.1. To provide formal procedure on hiring, induction and termination of employees. It should contain 
the framework for managing staff, while allowing management to respond and adapt to individual 
situations. 
2.2. To provide clear reporting structures that spell out who’s in charge and how tasks are to be 
accomplished in the organization. Every successf ul team has well-defined positions for its 
members. Everyone knows what he or she is to  do; how to do it; and how their performance can 
impact those around them. The policy should pr ovide a clarification and validation of the 
responsibilities. 
2.3. It has been seen that an employer is usually held accountable for the bad behaviors of his/her 
employee, especially when that bad behavior affects other employees, target groups or 
individuals. In such cases, the human resource policy should provide clear and specific behavioral 
standards in the form of rules for spotting and addressing violations of those standards. 
 
 
 
7 
 
Overall, human resource policy serves as a guide on decision-making guideline for the management. For 
the employees, it serves as a guide on how to conduct oneself in the organization.  
 
 
3. STEPS INVOLVED IN HUMAN RESOURCE POLICY DEVELOPMENT 
Generally, the human resource policy development process includes the following steps: 
 Need for the policy on Human Resource in the organization should be established.  
 The establishment of need should be followed by de velopment of the draft policy. This will be 
done by a team of people who are assigned this job. 
 Along with the policies a draft on the procedures should also be developed. 
 Once the draft policy is ready, it should be critically reviewed by key members (usually by all 
those who will be using it). 
 Next, the reviewed policy should be approved by the approving authority (usually the Board). 
 The approved policy should then be formally  implemented and the policy manual should be 
shared with the employees along with all necessar y application formats such as leave format, 
travel requisition format, etc.  
 After sometime the existing policy should to be review and updated, so that the policy is robust 
and relevant on any particular date. The interval for policy review shall be discerned by the Board 
in consultation with the management. In many cases , the interval is not fixed and the review can 
take place when a need is felt which has to be approved by the Board. 
 Once the old policy has been reviewed and necessa ry changes have been incorporated, it should 
be appropriately conveyed to all. 
 
 
4. RESPONSIBILITY OF DEVELOPIONG HUMAN RESOURCE POLICY 
In large organizations, it is the human resources depa rtment and in small organizations a small assigned 
committee/ team which develop the policy after taking into consideration the vision, mission and 
objectives of the organization. The draft of the policy is shared with the management for feedback and 
after changes the same is approved by the board. Th e key areas that should be covered in the human 
resource policy manual are: 
1. Scope of the Policy 
 
 
8 
 
2. Functions (Roles & Responsibilities)  
 
3. Standards of Conduct 
3.1. Conflict of Interest Guidelines 
3.2. Confidentiality 
3.3. Privacy 
3.4. Complaint/Grievance Resolution 
 
4. Employment Practices 
4.1. Recruitment, Selection, Appointment Practices 
4.2. Orientation and Induction 
4.3. Probationary Period 
4.4. Anti-discrimination/ Equal Opportunity 
4.5. Discrimination and Harassment 
 
5. Termination of Employment 
5.1. Notice of Resignation 
5.2. Discipline by Suspension or Dismissal 
5.3. Terminations  
5.4. Retirement 
5.5. Exit Interviews 
 
6. Hours of Work / Leave 
6.1. Hours of work 
6.2. Annual Leave 
6.3. Statutory Holidays 
6.4. Special Leave 
6.5. Maternity Leave / Paternity Leave 
6.6. Medical Leave 
 
7. Compensation & Employee Administration 
7.1. Pay Administration 
7.2. Job Description 
7.3. Performance Evaluations 
7.4. Travel & Expenses 
 
8. Benefits 
8.1. Insurance and other benefits 
8.2. Pension 
8.3. Payroll 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
9. Training and Development  
 
 
10. Work Environment 
10.1. Safe and Healthy Work Environment 
 
For a more detailed template on Human Resource Policy, refer to Annexure A.  
 
 
5. UPDATING THE HUMAN RESOURCE POLICY  
One very crucial element of any policy is that its  relevance remains intact in current time. Hence, 
developing the human resource policy is an on-goin g process. The department/ committee/ team involved 
in formulating the human resource policy is also entr usted with the responsibility of reviewing, adding, 
deleting or revising the policy. This is to ensure that  the policy remain current with the objective and with 
organization needs. Further, the human resource depa rtment/ committee/ team help interpret policies, 
ensuring that they are applied fairly and equitably throughout the organization. Key issues that must be 
ensured by the organization’s human resource department are: 
 The policy manual is kept up-to-date; 
 The policy manual continues to set out the procedure that must be followed in the operation of the 
system and procedures; 
 Sufficient copies of the manual are available; 
 Amendments to the policy manual are properly au thorized and communicated to the concerned 
parties immediately. 
 
 
6. CONCLUSION 
There are different types of people in an organization and they react differently to the need for policies 
and procedures based on those differences. For exampl e, some people prefer there should be a written 
policy for everything, while others favor having no policies at all and would leave everything open to 
interpretation as situations arise. Neither of these extremes contributes to a work environment that is 
conducive to high productivity levels. The focus of an  organization is not just about meeting specific 
goals and objectives, but also about how one can achieve them.  
 
10 
 
Thus, policies and procedures are like the lighthouse which guides an organization on its way to its 
destination i.e. achievement of the organizational goals/objectives. Policies ar e the ‘means’ but not the 
‘end’. It is important to note that human resource policy is an internal document of an organization and is 
not a legal requirement. It takes some effort to de velop and implement the huma n resource policy, but it 
brings definite long-term benefits as it will overa ll minimize the incidence of disputes or grievances 
within the organization. The human resource policy do es not have to be complex, but comprehensive and 
compliant with the organizations objectives and need. 
 
 
 
 
Watch out for the next issue on “Policies – Finance Policy” 
 
 
Published by Mr. Sanjay Patra on behalf of 
Financial Management Service Foundation 
ACCOUNTABILITY HOUSE, A-5, Sector 26, NOIDA-201 301 
Tel: 91-120-47732200 | Fax: 91-120-4773299 | Email: fmsf@fmsfindia.org 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Annexure A 
HUMAN RESOURCE POLICY TEMPLATE 
 
1. Definitions  
This section outlines both legal and non legal defi nitions for the purpose of providing clarity on 
the terms used in the policy. 
 
2. Functions (Roles & Responsibilities)  
2.1. Management - A summary description of the roles and responsibilities of core management 
of the organization. 
 
2.2. Staff - Staff may have different expectations, duties, terms and conditions of employment and 
accountabilities. Policies should indicate the roles and responsibilities for the following types 
of employees: 
a. Full-time staff 
b. Term appointments 
c. Part-time appointments 
d. Probationary Appointments 
e. Casual or Contractual employees 
 
2.3. Board - The Board has a role to play regarding Human Resource Management of an 
organization. That role should be outlined both in the Board policy as well as in the 
organizational human resource policy. 
 
3. Standards of Conduct 
3.1.  Conflict of Interest Guidelines 
o The extent of Conflict of Interest Guidelines is dependent on the type of organization. 
o Conflict of Interest Guidelines may differ for management, employees, board members. 
Guidelines might outline or indicate: 
 Obligations 
 Use of property 
 Disclosure of information 
 Feasibility of acceptance of hospitality or other benefits 
 Soliciting or acceptance of economic benefit or preferential treatment 
 
3.2. Confidentiality 
o Employees may be required to sign confiden tiality agreements / statements for the 
purposes of information handling. If this is the case, the policy may indicate that a 
particular level of Security Clearance is required. 
 
3.3. Privacy 
o Employee files are to be kept confidential – the process to ensure confidentiality should 
be outlined. 
o Privacy statements should include the pr ocess for employee access to and use of 
confidential and private information. 
 
3.4. Complaint/Grievance Resolution 
12 
 
o Complaint resolution process guidelines could include timeframes, responsibilities and 
possible mechanisms. 
o Formal and informal complaint processes may be described. 
 
4. Employment Practices 
4.1. Recruitment, Selection, Appointment Practices 
o Who is authorized to make selection and where approvals are required 
o What competitive processes are to be followed 
o Procedures around conducting reference checks 
 
4.2. Orientation and Induction 
o Induction plan and schedule for new recruits 
o Documents to be provided for orientation  
 
4.3. Probationary Period 
o Who all are eligible for probation 
o Time frame for employee’s probationary periods 
o Performance evaluation process at the end of the probationary period 
 
4.4. Anti-discrimination/ Equal Opportunity 
o Guidelines for equality and fair practices in the organization 
 
4.5. Discrimination and Harassment 
o Defining the acts to be covered under discrimination & harassment 
o Procedure for handling such issues 
o Consequences of indulging in such acts 
 
5. Termination of Employment 
5.1. Notice of Resignation 
o To whom resignation is to be given 
o Timeline for submitting resignation 
 
5.2. Discipline by Suspension or Dismissal 
o Procedures for Suspension in the incident of employee misconduct 
o Processes for disciplinary action should be outlined 
 
5.3. Terminations  
o Processes and circumstances for layoff and termination may be outlined in the policy 
 
5.4. Retirement 
o Age for retirement  
o Procedure to be followed for retiring employees. 
 
5.5. Exit Interviews 
o Exit interviews between manage ment and employees are often a important feedback for 
the organization. The process of conducti ng the interview may be outlined in the 
organization policy. 
 
6. Hours of Work / Leave 
6.1. Hours of work 
13 
 
o Hours of work for staff / employees would in clude the normal work week and the work 
day schedule 
o  Any processes for time recording and management  would be indicated in this section, as 
would any repercussions regarding attendance 
o The definition of “Overtime”, who it applies to, and the structure for compensation or 
payment options would be outlined in this section 
 
6.2. Annual Leave 
o Eligibility for annual leave will be specific to classification of employee and may be 
subject to a probationary period 
o Include procedures for vacation accrual, scheduling, vacation pay and vacation carry over 
 
6.3. Statutory Holidays 
o Designated statutory holidays, statutory holiday entitlement and their application for 
employees 
o Any recognition or accommodation of other re ligious or cultural holidays should be 
included 
 
6.4. Special Leave 
o Guidelines for other types of leave may be included 
 
6.5. Maternity Leave / Paternity Leave 
o Eligibility of employees for Maternity and Paternity leave 
o Procedure and time frame for Maternity and Paternity leave 
 
6.6. Medical Leave 
o Procedures for the sick leave for full and part time employees 
 
7. Compensation & Employee Administration 
7.1. Pay Administration 
o Processing pay or pay administration proce dures, including any pay deductions, pay 
frequency and salary increases would be outlined in this section 
o This may include notes on maintenance of the pay system 
 
7.2. Job Descriptions 
o Standardized job descriptions may be found within the policy itself 
o Wherein the job descriptions are not included a policy may reflect how the descriptions 
will be developed and used by employers and employees 
o In the case of Bands, job descriptions may be provided for all Band Officers / Councilors 
 
7.3. Performance Evaluations 
o Procedures outlining performance reviews ma y include timeframe s (annual, bi-annual 
reviews), reports and evaluations, signing, and keeping of records 
 
7.4. Travel & Expenses 
o Provision for work related travel and expenses should be outlined 
o Organizations and communities may refer to federal (Treasury Board) or provincial 
standard rates 
 
8. Benefits 
8.1. Insurance and other benefits 
14 
 
o Where insurance is provided to employees – this information would be provided 
 
8.2. Pension 
o Any possible employer contributions to pensions, as well as the terms of those 
contributions will be outlined in writing 
 
8.3. Payroll deductions 
o Type of deductions to be outlined 
 
9. Training and Development  
o Providing opportunities to the staff for capacity building, which may include internal on-the-
job training, written instructions such as sta ndard operating procedures, coaching, external 
training and courses for the development of the staff. 
 
10. Work Environment 
10.1. Safe and Healthy Work Environment 
o To include any regulations with regard to the work place, including but not limited to: 
 Occupational safety 
 Workplace violence 
 Drug or alcohol policies 
 Smoking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FMSF launched a 4 months certificate program  on Governance in July 2012 . The 
programme provides a comprehens ive understanding on Governance of  an organization. This is 
completely an e-based program. The 6 th Batch will commence in March 2015 . Please 
download the brochure from our website www.fmsflearningsystems.org 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Limited Seats!!! 
Registration 
now open 
Hurry 
 
 
 
16 
 
 
LATEST PUBLICATIONS OF FMSF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Finance & Legal Handbook for NPOs 4th Edition 
 
About the Book: 
A comprehensive handbook that gives a detailed overview on various 
Finance, Legal, and Governance aspect of NPOs. This is a well researched 
book of more than 600 pages and written  in a layman’s language. This 4th 
edition provides insights into many new areas that require more attention in 
the fast changing scenario for voluntary organizations. 
 To order the above book mail to fmsf@fmsfindia.org, the DD /Cheque 
for the same should be in favour of Financial Management Service 
Foundation payable at NOIDA. Please include Rs. 50 per book towards 
shipping and handling charges.  
You can also order your copy online logon to our website 
www.fmsfindia.org 
 
Published by: 
FMSF (2012)  
                 
Price: Rs 1100/- 
(Offer Price Rs. 800/-) 
Comprehensive commentaries on FCRA 2010 
 
About the Book: 
This is an extensively researched boo k of more than 400 pages This book 
provides comprehensive commentaries on the Foreign Contribution 
(Regulation) Act, 2010 and Foreign Cont ribution (Regulation) Rules, 2011. It 
covers all possible controversies and critical issues of FCRA. It is in a 
layman’s language for easy dissemination 
To order the above book mail to fmsf@fmsfindia.org, the DD /Cheque for 
the same should be in favour of Centre for Promoting Accountability 
payable at NOIDA. Please include Rs. 50 per book towards shipping and 
handling charges.  
You can also order your copy online logon to our website www.fmsfindia.org 
 
 
Published by: 
FMSF (2012)  
               
Price: Rs 895/- 
(Offer Price 
Rs.600/-) 
 