WATER POLLUTION  
A Project Report Submitted   
In partial fulfillment of the requirements for Environmental 
Studies Project  
BACHELOR OF BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION  
 Submitted by  
V. DILLI BABU  (412300897)  
UNDER THE GUIDANCE BY  
Mr. P. SRINIVASULU  
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS  
 
K.C.S.KASI NADAR COLLEGE OF ARTS &SCIENCE 
(Belongs to S.V.H.N.A. Dharma Fund)  
Affiliated to University of Madras Co Education 
ISO 9001 : 2015 CERTIFIED  
Accredited with A Grade by NAAC 
96, Ellaya Street, R.K.Nagar, Chennai-21.  


 
 
                       Water Pollution 
       INTRODUCTION 
India is one of the World’s most polluted country. Water Pollution is a major environmental  
issue in India. Around 80% of India’s water is severely polluted because people dump raw 
sewage, silt and garbage into the country’s river and lakes. Other sources of pollution include 
agriculture runoff and unregulated small -scale industry. Most river, lakes surface water in 
India are polluted due to industries, untreated sewage and solid wastes. This has led to water 
being undrinkable and the population having to rely on illegal and expensive sources. Many 
Indian children die from Diarrhea. Water pollution is a serious problem in India as almost 70 
per cent of its surface water resources and a growing percentage of its groundwater reserves 
are contaminated by biological, toxic, organic, and inorganic pollutants. In many cases, these  
sources have  been rendered unsafe  for human  consumption as well as for  other activities, 
such as irrigation and industrial needs. This shows that degraded water quality can contribute 
to water scarcity as it limits its availability for both human use and for the ecosystem. 
In 1995, the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) identified severely polluted stretches on 
18 major rivers in India. Not surprisingly, a majority of these stretches were found in and 
around large urban Areas. Besides a rapidly depleting groundwater table in different parts, the 
country faces another major problem on the water front —groundwater contamination —a 
problem which has affected as many as 19 states, including Delhi. Geo -genic contaminants, 
including salinity, iron, fluoride, and arsenic have affected groundwater in over 200 districts 
spread across 19 states. 
Water Pollution is a major global problem. It requires ongoing evaluation and revision of 
water resources policy at all the levels (international down to individual aquifers and wells). It 
has been suggested that water pollution is the leading worldwide cause of death and diseases. 
Water Pollution accounted for the deaths of 1.8 million people in 2015. The Organization 
Global Oceanic Environmental Survey (GOES) consider water pollution as one of the main 
Environmental problems that can present a danger for the existence of life on Earth in the 
next decades. One of the main concern is that water pollution hampers phytoplankton who 
produce 70% of Oxygen and remove a large part of Carbon dioxide from Earth. 
Water Pollution occurs when unwanted materials enter into water, changes the quality of 
water and harmful to Environmental and human health. Water is an important natural 
resources used for drinking and other developmental purpose in our lives. Safe drinking 
water is necessary for human health all over the world. Being a universal solvent, water is a 
major sources of infection. According to World Health Organization (WHO) 80% diseases 
are water borne. Drinking water in various countries does not meet WHO  standards. 3.1% 
deaths occur due to the unhygienic and poor quality of water.  
  
 
 
Due to historical, geographical, religious, political, and sociocultural reasons, India has a unique place in 
the world. Pollution-causing activities have caused severe changes in aquatic environments over the last 
few decades. Serious questions have been raised in context to the safe use of river water for drinking and 
other purposes in recent times. Numerous contaminants are playing a major role in polluting the river 
water. It is one of the main concerns for most of the metropolitan cities of developing nations. Rivers play 
a vital role in shaping up the natural, cultural, and economic aspects of any country. The Yamuna river is 
one such river and it provides sustenance to ecology and is therefore considered holy by the people of 
India. It is a tributary of the river Ganges in India. Two of them together have had substantial importance 
in shaping up the history and geography of our country. It passes through several states such as Uttar 
Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Haryana, and Delhi. It has a length of approximately 1,380 km. 
More than 600 lakh people are dependent on their living and income on this river ( Census Reports of  
India 2001, 1971–1991). 
 
This paper mainly attempt to provide a basic concept of the types, sources and effects of water pollution  
in general with a short glimpses of the recent status of  water pollution in India and finally the preventive 
measures taken so far to check its detrimental impact for the days ahead. 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
OBJECTIVES 
 
➢ To analyse the types, causes and effect of water pollution in general. 
 
 
➢ To understand the extent of water pollution in the surroundings. 
 
 
➢ To give an idea of the pollution preventive measures to the society. 
 
 
➢ To create general awareness regarding water pollution issues and 
ways to recover and restore water quality at its best through 
enacted laws and rules framed by the Government. 
 
➢ To promote research activities in developing easier and cost 
effective water quality checking methods primarily at domestic 
level. 
 
 
➢ To provide information of the present scenario of water pollution 
in India in a nut shell  in order to provoke awareness to act wisely 
to check its further deterioration and conserve water at its best. 
  
TYPES OF WATER POLLUTION 
Mainly Five Types of Water Pollution can be identified: 
1. Surface Water Pollution 
Surface water pollution includes pollution of rivers, oceans. It is often caused by nutrients, 
pathogens, plastics and chemicals such as antibiotics, heavy metals and pesticides. These 
pollutants have different Environmental effects. Excess nutrients, for instance may result in 
harmful algal blooms and hypoxia both in rivers and in coastal seas. 
 
 
 
Surface water pollution 
 
Surface Water pollution is almost entirely the result of human activities. Agriculture,  
mining, factory effluent, landfills, human/animal waste and localized pollution are just some 
of the most common sources of surface water pollution. 
The major sources of surface water pollution are 
● Sewage from household. 
● Waste water from the industry. 
● Nitrate and fertilizers from fields and pastures. 
2. Marine Pollution 
One common path of entry by contaminants to the sea are rivers. An example is directly 
discharging sewage and industrial waste into the ocean. Pollution such as this occurs 
particularly in developing nations. 
 
 
Marine Pollution 
Large gyres (vortexes) in the oceans trap floating plastic debris. Plastic debris can absorb 
toxic chemicals from ocean pollution, potentially poisoning any creature that eats it. Many 
of these long-lasting pieces end up in the stomachs of marine birds and animals. This results 
in obstruction of digestive pathways, which leads to reduced appetite or even starvation. 
3. Groundwater Pollution 
Ground water is one of the important sources of water for irrigation purpose. Groundwater 
contamination occurs when man -made products such as gasoline, oil, road salts and 
chemicals get into the groundwater and cause it to become unsafe and unfit for human use. 
Interactions between groundwater and surface water are complex. By its very nature 
groundwater aquifers are susceptible to contamination from sources that may not directly 
affect surface water bodies.  Analysis of groundwater contamination may focus on soil 
characteristics and site geology, hydrogeology, hydrology and the nature of the 
contaminants. 
Causes of groundwater pollution include-- naturally-occurring (geogenic) on–site sanitation 
systems, sewage, fertilizers and pesticide, commercial and industrial leaks, hydraulic, 
fracturing, landfill leachate. 
 

 
4. Microbiological Pollution 
Microbiological water pollution is usually a natural form of water pollution caused by 
microorganisms. Different types of microorganisms such as bacteria ,viruses and protozoa 
live in water and cause fish, land animals and humans to become ill. Serious diseases such as 
cholera is caused from microorganisms that lives in water. These diseases usually affects 
health of people in poorer countries as they do not have the facilities to treat polluted water. 
 
Generally speaking contamination occurs if any part of a system, product or medicine gets in 
touch with the  microbiological pathogens where it should be  sterile. For example  if a 
surgical instrument is contaminated with pathogens then the result might be a surgical 
wound infection. Contamination in infusion settings may occur when pathogens are carried 
inside of the infusion system, mostly happening during manipulation . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
5. Macroscopic pollution 
Large visible items polluting the water – may be termed "floatables" in an urban storm water 
context, or marine debris when found on the open seas, and can include such items as: 
 
• Trash or garbage (e.g. paper, plastic, or  food waste) discarded by people on the ground,  
along with accidental or intentional dumping of rubbish, that are washed by rainfall 
into storm drains and eventually discharged into surface waters. 
• Nurdles, small ubiquitous waterborne plastic pellets. 
• Shipwrecks, large derelict ships. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
CATEGORIES OF POLLUTION SOURCES 
 
Sources of water pollution are generally grouped into three categories based 
on their origin. 
 
Point Sources 
Point sources water pollution refers to contamination that enter a 
waterway from a single, specific and identifiable sources such as a pipe 
or ditch, discharges from a sewage treatment plant, a factory, or a city 
storm drain. 
 
Non-point sources 
Non point source pollution refers to diffuse contamination that does not 
originate from a single discrete source. This type of pollution is often the 
cumulative effect of small amounts of contaminants gathered from a 
large area. A common example is the leaching out of nitrogen 
compounds from fertilized agricultural lands, nutrient runoff in storm 
water from “ sheet flow” over an agricultural field or a forest . 
 
Atmospheric deposition 
Contaminants carried by air currents and precipitated into watersheds 
or directly onto surface waters. 
 
• DOMESTIC SEWAGE AND WASTEWATER 
industries and is more harmful . 
• AGRICULTURAL EFFLUENTS 
• MARINE DUMPING 
CAUSES OF WATER POLLUTION 
 
 
Inadequate sewage collection and treatment are sources of water pollution. It is reported that 75 to 
80% water pollution is caused by the domestic sewage and wastewater goes back in the 
environment without being treated or reused. Polluted river have intolerable smell and contains less 
flora and fauna. 80% of the world’s population is facing threats to water security. Large amount 
of domestic sewage is drained in to river . Domestic sewage contains toxicants, solid waste, 
plastic litters and bacterial contaminants and these toxic materials causes water pollution.  
 
 • INDUSTRIAL EFFLUENTS 
Industries produce a lot of waste containing toxic chemicals and pollutants. A huge amount of the 
industrial waste is drained in the fresh water which then flows into canals, rivers and eventually in the 
sea. Another source of water pollution is the burning of fossil fuels, causing air pollution like acid rain 
which then flows to streams, lakes, and other stretches of water. Hazardous material discharged from 
the industries is responsible for surface water and ground water.25% pollution is caused by the 
 
 
Agriculture has an impact on water pollution due to the use of chemicals such as fertilizers, pesticides, 
fungicides, herbicides or insecticides running off in the water, as well as livestock excrement, manure 
and methane (greenhouse effect). Pesticides used to kill bacteria, pest and different germs in 
agricultural fields contain chemicals which directly pollute the water and affect the quality of 
water. If pesticides are excess in amount or poorly managed then it would be hazardous for 
agriculture ecosystem Residues of chemicals mix with river water due to flooding, heavy  
rainfall, excess irrigation and enter in the food chain. These chemicals are lethal for living 
organisms and many vegetables and fruits are contaminated with these chemicals. 
 
 
Everyday, garbage such as plastic, paper, aluminum, food, glass, or rubber are deposited into the sea. 
These items take weeks to hundreds of years to decompose, and thus they are a major cause for water 
pollution. Regarding aquaculture, pollution is directly in the water, as excess food and fertilizers are 
causing dystrophication. 
 
  
  
 
Increasing population is creating many issues but it also plays negative role in polluting 
the water . 
 
Increasing population leads to increase in solid waste generation . 
 
Solid and liquid waste is discharged in to rivers. Water is also contaminated by human 
excreta. In contaminated water, a large number of bacteria are also found which is 
harmful for human health . 
 
Government is incapable to supply essential needs to citizens because of increasing 
number of population. Sanitation facilities are more in urban areas than rural areas. 
 
The rising number of industries in India contribute heavily to water pollution as industrial 
waste is most often untreated. The industries with the heaviest impact on water bodies are 
thermal power plants, engineering industries, paper mills, steel plants and textile 
industries. 
 
• PLASTICS 
 
Most plastics are not biodegradable (they do not break down naturally in the 
environment), which means that things like plastic bottle tops can survive in the marine 
environment for a long time. (A plastic bottle can survive an estimated 450 years in the 
ocean and plastic fishing line can last up to 600 years. 
 
While plastics are not toxic in quite the same way as poisonous chemicals, they 
nevertheless present a major hazard to seabirds, fish, and other marine creatures. For 
example, plastic fishing lines and other debris can strangle or choke fish. 
 
The plastic and polythene bags doesn’t get damage so easily and since they are light in 
weight so they float on water and due to this it cause problems for the water animal .they 
pollute the water bodies and causes water pollution. 
 
• PATHOGEN 
Disease-causing microorganisms are referred to as pathogens. Pathogens can 
produce waterborne diseases in either human or animal hosts. Coliform bacteria, which 
are not an actual cause of disease, are commonly used as a bacterial indicator of water 
pollution. Other microorganisms sometimes found in contaminated surface waters that 
have caused human health problems include: Burkholderia pseudomallei , 
Cryptosporidium parvum , Giardia lamblia , Salmonella, Norovirus and other viruses/ 
POPULATION GROWTH 
 
• TOXIC WASTES 
 
Waste is consider toxic if it is poisonous, radioactive, explosive, carcinogenic (causing 
cancer), mutagenic (causing damage  to chromosomes), teratogenic (causing birth 
defects), or  bioaccumulative (that is, increasing in concentration at the higher ends of 
food chains). Sources of toxic chemicals include  improperly disposed wastewater from 
industrial plants and chemical process facilities (lead, mercury, chromium) as well as 
surface runoff containing pesticides used on agricultural areas and suburban lawns 
(chlordane, dieldrin, heptachlor). 
 
• SEDIMENTS 
 
Sediment (e.g., silt) resulting from soil erosion can be carried into water bodies by 
surface runoff. Suspended sediment interferes with the penetration of sunlight and upsets 
the ecological balance of a body of water. Also, it can disrupt the reproductive cycles 
of fish and other forms of  life, and when it settles out of suspension it can smother 
bottom-dwelling organisms. 
• THERMAL POLLUTION 
 
Thermal pollution is the rise or fall in the temperature of a natural body of water caused 
by human influence. Thermal pollution, unlike chemical pollution, results in a change in 
the physical properties of water. A common cause of thermal pollution is the use of water 
as a coolant by power plants and industrial manufacturers. Valuable species of game fish 
(e.g., trout) cannot survive in water with very low levels of dissolved oxygen. A major 
source of heat is the practice of discharging cooling water from power plants into rivers; 
the discharged water may be as much as 15 °C (27 °F) warmer than the naturally 
occurring water. Elevated water temperatures decrease oxygen levels, which can kill fish 
and alter food chain composition, reduce species biodiversity, and foster invasion by 
new thermophilic species. Urban runoff may also elevate temperature in surface waters. 
Thermal pollution can also be caused by the release of very cold water from the base of 
reservoirs into warmer rivers. 
• PETROLEUM OIL SPILLS 
 
Petroleum (oil) pollution occurs when oil from roads and parking lots is carried in surface 
runoff into water bodies. Accidental oil spills are also a source of oil pollution —as in the 
devastating spills from the tanker  Exxon Valdez  (which released more than 260,000 
barrels in Alaska’s  Prince William Sound  in 1989) and from the  Deepwater Horizon oil 
rig (which released more than 4 million barrels of oil into the Gulf of Mexico  in 2010). 
Oil slicks eventually move toward shore, harming aquatic life and damaging recreation 
areas. 
 
• RADIOACTIVE WASTES 
People view radioactive waste with great alarm —and for good reason. At high enough 
concentrations it can kill; in lower concentrations it can cause cancers  and other illnesses. 
The biggest sources of radioactive pollution in Europe are two factories that reprocess 
waste fuel from  nuclear power plants : Sellafield on the north -west coast of Britain and 
Cap La Hague on the north coast of France. Both discharge radioactive waste water into 
the sea, which ocean currents then carry around the world. Countries such as Norway, 
which lie downstream from Britain, receive significant doses of radioactive pollution 
from Sellafield. The Norwegian government has repeatedly complained that Sellafield 
has increased radiation levels along its coast by 6 –10 times. Both the Irish and  
Norwegian governments continue to press for the plant's closure. 
 
• CHEMICAL WASTES 
 
Detergents are relatively mild substances. Toxic chemicals such as polychlorinated 
biphenyls (PCBs) , were once widely used to manufacture  electronic circuit boards, but 
their harmful effects have now been recognized and their use is highly restricted. 
Acidity caused by industrial discharges (especially sulfur dioxide  from power plants), 
ammonia from food processing waste, petroleum hydrocarbons, including fuels 
(gasoline, diesel  fuel,  jet  fuels,  and fuel  oil)  lubricants  (motor  oil),  and 
 
fuel combustion byproducts, from storm water runoff etc. Another kind of toxic pollution 
comes from heavy metals, such as lead, cadmium, and mercury.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EFFECTS OF WATER POLLUTION 
1. Diseases: In humans, drinking or consuming polluted water in any way has many disastrous 
effects on our health. It causes typhoid, cholera, hepatitis and various other diseases. 
2. Destruction of Ecosystems: Ecosystems are extremely dynamic and respond to even small 
hanges in the environment. Water pollution can cause an entire ecosystem to collapse if left 
unchecked. Disruption in food chains happens when toxins and pollutants in the water are 
consumed by aquatic animals (fish, shellfish etc) which are then consumed by humans. 
3. Eutrophication: Chemicals in a water body, encourage the growth of algae. These 
algae form a layer on top of the pond or lake. Bacteria feed on this algae and this decreases 
the amount of oxygen in the water body, severely affecting the aquatic life there. When there 
is an excess of chemical nutrients mainly nitrates and phosphates  in the water, it leads to 
eutrophication or nutrient pollution. Eutrophication decreases the level of Oxygen, reduces 
the quality of water, markes the water inhabitable for fish, affects the breeding process 
within the marine life and increases the primary productivity of the marine ecosystem. 
 
Eutrophication Effect of Eutrophication 
4. Acidification : Oceans act as a natural reservoir for absorbing the carbon dioxide from the 
Earth’s atmosphere. But due to rising level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, the oceans 
across the world are becoming acidic inn nature, as a consequence, it leads to acidification of 
oceans. Researches and scientists have not been able to uncover the potential damage ocean 
acidification may have on the Earth’s atmosphere. But there is a strong concern that 
acidification might lead to dissolution of Calcium Carbonate structures, that can affect the 
shell formation in shellfish and also the corals.  
  
 
 
5. Effect of toxins 
There are persistent toxins that do not get dissolved or disintegrate  with the marine  ecosystem 
rapidly. Toxins such as pesticides, DDT, PCBs, furans, TBT, radioactive waste, phenols, and 
dioxins get accumulated in the tissue cells of the marine life forms and lead to bioaccumulation,   
hampering their life and sometimes leads to a mutation in aquatic life forms. 

The ghats of river Ganges are polluted.  
A PIE CHART DEPICTING THE RATE OF USE OF GROUND WATER IN VARIOUS 
PURPOSES 
 
 
1. Pollution of the main waterbodies: 
Rivers play a vital role in shaping up the natural, cultural, and economic aspects of any country. The 
Yamuna river is one such river and it provides sustenance to ecology and is therefore considered holy by 
the people of India. It derives from the glacier called Yamunotri in the Himalayan ranges. States through 
which the Yamuna river flows are the Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, and  
Delhi. The Yamuna river is also divided into several tributaries such as the Hindon, Tons, Giri, 
Rishiganga, Hanuman Ganga, Sasur Khaderi, Chambal, Betwa, Ken, Sindh, and Baghain as it is flowing 
through several cities. These cities are the Yamuna Nagar, Delhi, Faridabad, Mathura, Agra, Etawah, and 
Prayagraj. It is a tributary of the river Ganges in India. Two of them together have had substantial 
importance in shaping up the history and geography of our country. It passes through several states such 
as Uttar Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Haryana, and Delhi. It has a length of approximately 
1,380 km. More than 600 lakh people are dependent on their living and income on this river ( Census 
Reports of India 2001, 1971–1991). A) The Ganges 
 

  
More than 500  million people live along the Ganges River. An estimated 2,000,000 persons 
ritually bath daily in the river, which is considered holy by Hindus. Ganges river pollution is a 
major health risk. 
NRGBA was established by the Central Government of India, on 20 February 2009 under  
Section 3(3) of the Environment Protection Act, 1986. It also declared Ganges as the "National 
River" of India. The chair includes the  Prime Minister of India  and Chief ministers  of states 
through which the Ganges flows. 
B)  The Yamuna 
 
 
 
By an estimate by 2012, Delhi's sacred Yamuna river contained 7,500 coliform bacteria per 
100cc of water. A number of NGOs, pressure groups, eco -clubs, as well as citizens' movements, 
have been active in their task to clean the river. 
Even though India revised its National Water Policy  in 2002 to encourage community 
participation and decentralize water management, the country's complex bureaucracy ensures  
that it remains a "mere statement of intent." Responsibility for managing water issues is 
fragmented among a dozen different ministries and departments without any coordination. The 
government bureaucracy and state -run project department has failed to solve the problem,  
despite having spent many years and $140 million on this project. 
C)  Other polluted rivers worth mentioning are : 
 
• Buddha Nullah, a seasonal water stream, which runs through the Malwa region 
• The Mithi River, which flows through the city of Mumbai, is heavily polluted. 
• The Oshiwara River is severely polluted with solid and liquid waste generated by Mumbai. 
• Mithi River pollution 
• Mula River pollution 
• Gomti River pollution 
• Vrishabhavathi River pollution 

  
WASTE WATER TREATMENT 
The treatment of the waste water is carried out in the following three 
stages: 
1. Primary treatment 
2. Secondary treatment 
3. Tertiary treatment. 
• Primary treatment :- 
When the waste water is to be dumped off into a river or flowing 
steam, the treatment is carried  out by sedimentation, coagulation and 
filtration. This is known as primary treatment. 
• Secondary treatment :- 
The water after primary treatment is not fit for drinking purposes and 
has to undergo further treatment.  This is done through secondary or 
biological treatment. A commonly used method is to allow polluted 
water to spread over a large bed of stones and gravel so that the 
growth of different microorganisms needing nutrients and oxygen is 
encouraged. 
• Tertiary treatment :  
Tertiary treatment is actually disinfecting water. Chlorine is the 
most commonly used disinfectant used for killing bacteria. 
However, chlorine also reacts with traces of organic matter present 
in water and forms undesirable chlorinated hydrocarbons (toxic and 
potentially carcinogenic) 
 
helps to use water more efficiently. 
 
10. Air pollution prevention 
Air pollution has a direct impact on water contamination as 25% of human induced CO2 emissions         
are absorbed by oceans. This pollution causes a rapid acidification of our oceans, and threatens 
marine life and corals. Preventing air pollution is the best way to prevent this from happening.  
PREVENTION  AND CONTROL MEASURES 
I Preventive measures: 
The best way to prevent large-scale water pollution is to try and reduce its harmful effects. There 
are various small changes we can make to protect ourselves from a scary future where water is 
scarce. 
 
1. Save Water: Conserving water is our first aim. Water wastage is a major problem globally 
and we are only now waking up to the issue. Simply small changes you can make 
domestically will make a huge difference. 
2. Better treatment of sewage: So treating waste products before disposing of it in a water 
body helps reduce water pollution on a large scale. Agriculture or other industries can reuse 
this wastewater by reducing its toxic contents. 
3. Use environmentally friendly products: By using soluble products that do not go on to 
become pollutants, we can reduce the amount of water pollution caused by a household. 
4. Keep pet litter and debris out of street gutters. 
5. Use pesticides sparingly and use compost as fertilizers. 
6. Use detergents with less phosphate. 
 
7. Wastewater treatment 
 Wastewater treatment consists of removing pollutants from wastewater through a physical, 
chemical or biological process. The more efficient these processes are, the cleaner the water 
becomes. 
8. Green agriculture 
               Globally, agriculture accounts for 70% of water resources, so it is essential to have climate-friendly 
               crops, efficient irrigation that reduces the need for water and energy-efficient food production. 
               Green agriculture is also crucial to limit the chemicals that enter the water. 
       9. Storm water management 
              Stormwater management is the effort to reduce runoff of rainwater or melted snow into streets, 
              lawns and other sites and the improvement of water quality” according to the US Environmental 
              Protection Agency (EPA). It is important to avoid pollutants from contaminating the water and 
 
  
 
II. Control measures: 
1. To remove heat from wastewater generated by power plants or manufacturing 
plants the following technologies are used: 
a) cooling ponds, man-made bodies of water designed for cooling 
by evaporation, convection, and radiation 
b) cooling towers, which transfer waste heat to 
the atmosphere through evaporation or heat transfer. 
c) cogeneration, a process where waste heat is recycled for domestic or industrial 
heating purposes. 
2. Toxic material like paints, cleaning supplies, and stain removers need to be disposed 
off in the right way. 
3. Purification of drinking water to enhance quality. 
4. The polluter pays principle (means that whoever causes pollution should have to pay to 
clean it up) is designed to deter people from polluting by making it less expensive for 
them to behave in an environmentally responsible way. 
5. Government of India enacted the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 
1974 to maintain wholesomeness of aquatic resources . The act prescribes various 
functions for the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) at the apex level and State 
Pollution Control Boards at the state level. 
6. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1948 was the first major U.S. law to 
address water pollution.  Growing  public  awareness  and  concern  for 
controlling water pollution led to sweeping amendments in 1972. 
7. Water Act 1974 aims to prevent and control water pollution. Under Water Act, 
1974, pollution control boards were created, who are responsible for implementation of 
its provisions. 
11. Plastic waste reduction 
80% of plastic in our oceans is from land sources. In order to reduce the amount of plastic entering our 
ocean, we need to both reduce our use of plastic globally, and to improve plastic waste management. 
12. Water conservation 
Without water conservation, we won’t go very far. It is central in making sure the world has better 
access to clean water. It means being aware that water is a scarce resource, taking care of it 
accordingly, and managing it responsibly. 
  
 
Water pollution is a global issue and world community is facing worst 
results of polluted water. Major sources of water pollution are discharge of 
domestic and agriculture wastes, population growth, excessive use of 
pesticides and fertilizers and urbanization. Bacterial, viral and parasitic 
diseases are spreading through polluted water and affecting human health. It 
is recommended that there should be proper waste disposal system and waste 
should be treated before entering in to river. 
 
Educational and awareness programs should be organized to control the pollution 
We can take individual action to help reduce water pollution, for example, by 
using environmentally friendly detergents, reducing pesticides, not pouring 
paints, solvents, oil, antifreeze, or other products containing harmful 
chemicals down the drain or onto the ground and so on. 
Most effective way to attain the goal of having clean water is to value self -
discipline in each individual in disposing all kinds of waste. 
 
While effective wastewater treatment has the tendency of salvaging the 
water environment, integration of environmental policies coupled with 
continuous periodical enlightenment on the present and future consequences 
of water pollution will greatly assist in conserving the water environment. 
 
Last but not the least, practice four R’s of resource use –Refuse, reduce, 
recycle and reuse in order to obtain better result to check water pollution. 